### 4.5.1 SEQ+ Rearranging the Computation Stages

p.457
With SEQ+(Fig 4.39), we create state registers to hold the signals computed during an instruction. Then, as a new clock cycle begins, the values propagate through the exact same logic to compute the PC for the now-current instruction.

p.458


### 4.5.2 Inserting Pipeline Registers

PIPE- uses nearly the same set of hardware units as our sequential design SEQ(Fig 4.40), but with the pipeline registers separating the stages.

F: holds a *predicted* value of the PC
D: sits between fetch and decode stages. Holds info


### 4.5.3 Rearranging and Relabeling Signals
p.462
Our sequential implementations SEQ and SEQ+ only process one instruction at a time, and so there are unique values for signals such as valC, valA and valE. In pipelined design, there will be multiple versions of these values associated with the different instructions flowing through the system.
...
We adopt a naming scheme where a signal stored in a pipeline register can be uniquely identified by prefixing its name with that of the pipe register written in uppercase.
...
We also need to refer to some signals that have just been computed within a stage. These are labeled by prefixing the signal name with the first character of the stage name, written in lowercase.

In SEQ+, we could connect dstM, dstE signals directly to the address inputs of the register file write ports.
In PIPE-, these signals directed to the register file only once they reach the write-back stage.  

p.463(about Select A)
We can see that this block generates the value valA for the pipeline register E by choosing either 1)valP from pipeline register D or 2)the value read from the A port of the register file. Of all the different instructions, only the call requires valP in the memory stage. Only the jump instructions require the value of valP in the execute stage(in the event the jump is not token). None of these instructions requires a value read from register file. Therefore, we can reduce the amount of pipeline register state by merging these two signals and carrying them through the pipeline as a single signal valA.
<This is also mentioned in fig4.58:>
No instruction requires both valP and the value read from register port A, and so these two can be merged to form the signal valA for later stages.
<That's why E_valA has one route direct to M pipeline register in execute stage, and M_valA will be sent back to predict PC in memory stage>


### 4.5.4 Next PC Prediction
p.464
If the fetched instruction is a conditional branch, we will not know whether or not the branch should be taken until several cycles later, after the instruction has passed through the execute stage. If the fetched instruction is a *ret*, we cannot determine the return location until the instruction has passed through the memory stage.


It chooses one of three values to serve as the address for the instruction memory:
+ the predicted PC
+ the value of valP for a not-token branch instruction that reaches pipeline register M(store in M_valA)
+ the value of the return address when a ret instruction reaches pipeline register W(store in W_valM)

### 4.5.5 Pipeline Hazards
p.468
A data hazard can arise for an instruction where one of its operands is updated by any of the three preceding instructions. These hazards occur because our pipelined

fig4.44 #prog2
                    1     2     3     4     5     6
irmovq $10, %rdx    F     D     E     M     W
irmovq  $3, %rax          F     D     E     M     W
nop
nop
addq  %rdx, %rax                F     D     E     M     W
halt                                  F     D     E     M     W

fig4.45 #prog3
                    1     2     3     4     5     6
irmovq $10, %rdx    F     D     E     M     W
irmovq  $3, %rax          F     D     E     M     W
nop
addq  %rdx, %rax                F     D     E     M     W
halt                                  F     D     E     M     W


fig4.51 #prog4 (Pipelined execution of prog4 using forwarding)
                    1     2     3     4     5     6
irmovq $10, %rdx    F     D     E     M     W
irmovq  $3, %rax          F     D     E     M     W
addq  %rdx, %rax                F     D     E     M     W
halt                                  F     D     E     M     W

#### Cycle 4
M(irmovq $10, %rdx)
  M_dstE = %rdx
  M_valE = 10

E(irmovq  $3, %rax)
  E_dstE = %rax
  e_valE <- 3

D(addq  %rdx, %rax)
  d_valA = 0 <-- Error
  d_valB = 0 <-- Error

#### Cycle 4(use forwarding)
M(irmovq $10, %rdx)
  M_dstE = %rdx       ----
  M_valE = 10      -------|
                          |
E(irmovq  $3, %rax)       |
  E_dstE = %rax           |
  e_valE <- 3      -----  |
                       |  |
D(addq  %rdx, %rax)    |  |
  d_valA <- M_valE ----|--
  d_valB <- e_valE ----

Forwarding can also be used with values read from the memory and destined for write port M. From the memory stage, we can forward the value that has just been read from the data memory(signal m_valM).

fig4.53 #prog5 (Example of load/use data hazard)
                          1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8
irmovq    $128, %rdx      F     D     E     M     W
irmovq      $3, %rcx            F     D     E     M     W
rmmovq    %rcx, 0(%rdx)               F     D     E     M     W
irmovq     $10, %rbx                        F     D     E     M     W
mrmovq 0(%rdx), %rax                              F     D     E     M     W
addq      %ebx, %eax                                    F     D     E     M     W
halt

#### Cycle 7
M(irmovq $10, %rbx)
  M_valE = $10
  M_dstE = %rbx

E(mrmovq 0(%rdx), %rax)
  e_valE <- E_valB + 0

D(addq %ebx, %eax)
  d_valA = M_valE     # forwarding from M
  d_valB = e_valE     # This forwarding results incorrectly, for mrmovq needs memory stage

fig4.54 #prog6 (Handling a load/use hazard by stalling)
                          1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8
irmovq    $128, %rdx      F     D     E     M     W
irmovq      $3, %rcx            F     D     E     M     W
rmmovq    %rcx, 0(%rdx)               F     D     E     M     W
irmovq     $10, %rbx                        F     D     E     M     W
mrmovq 0(%rdx), %rax                              F     D     E     M     W
bubble                                                              E     M     W
addq      %ebx, %eax                                          F     D     E     M     W
halt

#### Cycle 8


p.478 (how the pipeline to process the *ret* instruction)
0x000: irmovq stack,%rsp        # Initialize stack pointer
0x00a: call proc                # Procedure call
0x013: irmovq $10,%rdx          # Return point
0x01d: halt

0x020: .pos 0x20
0x020: proc:                    # proc:
0x020: ret                      # Return immediately
0x021: rrmovq %rdx,%rbx         # Not executed

0x030: .pos 0x30
0x030: stack:                   # stack: Stack pointer

fig4.55 #prog7
0x000: irmovq stack,%rsp       F   D   E   M   W
0x00a: call proc                   F   D   E   M   W
0x020: ret                             F   D   E   M   W
       bubble                                      E   M   W
       bubble                                          E   M   W
       bubble                                              E   M   W
0x013: irmovq $10,%rdx                                 F   D   
0x01d: halt

p.479 (how the pipeline to process mispredicted branch instructions)
0x000: xorq %rax,%rax
0x002: jne target       # Not taken
0x00b: irmovq $1, %rax  # Fall through
0x015: halt
0x016: target:
0x016: irmovq $2, %rdx  # Target
0x020: irmovq $3, %rbx  # Target+1
0x02a: halt

fig4.56 #prog7
0x000: xorq %rax,%rax    F   D   E   M   W
0x002: jne target            F   D   E   M   W
0x016: irmovq $2, %rdx           F   D   
       bubble                        ->  E   M   W
0x020: irmovq $3, %rbx               F  
       bubble                        ->  D   E   M   W
0x00b: irmovq $1, %rax                   F   D   E   M   W

### 4.5.6 Exception Handling
Exceptions can be generated either *internally*, by the executing program.
Or *externally*, by some outside signal.

In our simplified ISA model, we want the processor to halt when it reaches an exception and to set the appropriate status code. It should appear that all instructions up to the excepting instruction have completed, but none of the following instructions should have any effect on the programming-visible state.
In a more complete design, the processor would continue by invoking an exception handler.



### 4.5.7 PIPE Stage Implementations
#### PC Selection and Fetch Stage

the output of Select PC:
word f_pc = [
  M_icode == IJXX && !M_Cnd : M_valA;   # M_valA equals valP for IJXX
  W_icode == IRET : W_valM;
  1: F_predPC;
]

the output of Predict PC:
word f_predPC = [
  f_icode in { IJXX, ICALL } : f_valC;
  1: f_valP;
]

word f_stat = [
  imem_error: SADR;
  !instr_valid: SINS;
  f_icode == IHALT: SHLT;
  1: SAOK;
]

#### Decode and Write-back

word d_dstE = [
  D_icode in { IRRMOVQ, IIRMOVQ, IOPQ, IIADDQ } : D_rB;
  D_icode in { IPUSHQ, IPOPQ, ICALL, IRET } : RRSP;
  1 : RNONE;  # Don't write any register
]

word d_dstM = [
  D_icode in {  } : D_rA;
  D_icode in {  } : RRSP;
  1: RNONE;
]

there are five different forwarding sources:
Data word   Register ID
e_valE      e_dstE        ALU output
m_valM      M_dstM        Memory output
M_valE      M_dstE        Pending write to port E in memory stage
W_valM      W_dstM        Pending write to port M in write-back stage
W_valE      W_dstE        Pending write to port E in write-back stage

word d_valA = [
  D_icode in { IJXX, ICALL } : D_valP;
  D_icode == e_dstE : e_valE;
  D_icode == m_dstM : M_valM;
  D_icode == M_dstE : M_valE;
  D_icode == W_dstM : W_valM;
  D_icode == W_dstE : W_valE;
  1: d_rvalA;
]

#### Execute

### 4.5.8
Load/use hazard
detect load/use hazard condition, hold back decode stage, insert a bubble at  execute stage

ret
The key observation here is that there is no way to inject a bubble into the fetch stage of our pipeline. On every cycle, the fetch stage reads some instruction from the instruction memory.

Mispredicted branch
The misprediction will be detected as the jump instruction reaches the execute stage. The control logic then inject

Fig 4.66
                        F       D       E       M       W
ret                   stall   bubble  normal  normal  normal
load/use hazard       stall   stall   bubble  normal  normal
mispredicted branch   normal  bubble  bubble  normal  normal

M
E   mrmovq / popq
D   ret
