task_struct       mm_struct       vm_area_struct          process_virtual memory
                                ---> vm_end   -------- \
mm ---------------- pgd        |     vm_start -------\  \
                    ...        |     vm_prot          \  \----------------------
                    mmap ------      vm_flags          \      Shared Library
                                     ...                \ ----------------------
                                ---- vm_next            
                               |
                                ---> vm_end   -------- \
                                     vm_start -------\  \
                                     vm_prot          \  \----------------------
                                     vm_flags          \      Shared Library
                                     ...                \ ----------------------
                                ---- vm_next

Figure 9.27 highlights the kernel data structures that keep track of the virtual memory areas in a process. The kernel maintains a distinct task structure (task_struct in the source code) for each process in the system. The elements of the task structure either contain or point to all of the information that the kernel needs to run the process (e.g., the PID, pointer to the user stack, name of the executable object file, and program counter).

vm_start. Points to the beginning of the area.
vm_end. Points to the end of the area.
vm_prot. Describes the read/write permissions for all of the pages contained in the area.
vm_flags. Describes (among other things) whether the pages in the area are shared with other processes or private to this process.
vm_next. Points to the next area struct in the list.


Fig 9.28 Linux Page fault handling
vm_area_struct        process_virtual memory
vm_end
vm_start
vm_prot                
vm_flags


1. Is virtual address A legal? In other words, does A lie within an area defined by some area struct?
2. Is the attempted memory access legal? In other words, does the process have permission to read, write, or execute the pages in this area?

Is the attempted memory access legal? In other words, does the process have
permission to read, write, or execute the pages in this area? For example,
was the page fault the result of a store instruction trying to write to a read-only page in the code segment? Is the page fault the result of a process running in user mode that is attempting to read a word from kernel virtual memory? If the attempted access is not legal, then the fault handler triggers a protection exception, which terminates the process.
